OASIS Docbook TC
1 March '00

1.50 P.M.

Attending, voting members:

Norman Walsh, Arbortext, chairman
Terry Allen, Commerce One
Dennis Evans, Sun
Tony Graham, Mulberry; for a while
Michael Sabrio, Hewlett-Packard

Attending, visitor:

Eduardo Gutentag, Sun; for a while
Sunthar Visuvalingam, InformIT

The committee met for the first time after reappointment by the
ACTC.

Norm called the meeting to order.

The committee agreed to appoint Terry to take minutes for this
session.

The committee discussed a list of groups of elements Norm constructed
for another purpose, as a basis for beginning remodularization
of parameter entities, and worked through dbhier.mod, reexamining
the contents of book component elements and their compenent-level
contents, except for *Info elements.

Norm moved that we abandon the docbook-eb list; the motion passed
without objection.  Minutes, draft and final, are to be sent to 
docbook-tc.

Terry moved that we adjourn this first meeting at 5 P.M., meet
again on 2 March, 9.30-12.00 A.M.; and meet again in Paris, 14 June,
9.30 A.M.-12.00 P.M., and 1-5 P.M., and 15 June, 9.30 A.M.-12.00 P.M,
local time.  The motion passed without objection.

The committee discussed briefly design goals for the use of XML Schema.


Action Items:  
 - Norm to ask that docbook-eb be eliminated
 - Terry to ask the docbook list whether anyone is using ModeSpec
 - Terry to ask PAC about process for Docbook

2 March '00
9.40 A.M.

Attending, voting members:

Norm Walsh, Arbortext, chairman
Terry Allen, Commerce One
Dennis Evans, Sun
Tony Graham, Mulberry; for a while
Michael Sabrio, Hewlett-Packard

Attending, visitor:

Sunthar Visuvalingam, InformIT

Norm called the meeting to order.

Terry moved that the committee agree to an email ballot,
at the call of the chair, on advancing Docbook 4.0, when ready,
from the status of a Draft Specification of the Docbook TC
to a Specification of the Docbook TC (at which point it would
be ready for OASIS member approval as an OASIS Standard).

Discussion continued on parameterization issues.

The motion was approved without objection.

The meeting adjourned at 10.40.
